The Joe Rogan experience.
When you make the title of this book, talking to strangers, are,
are you, do you have a goal that you're trying to achieve?
Are you trying to illuminate certain aspect of communication?
Are you trying to highlight issues that people have had with these stories?
Like the Michael Brown story or.
Yeah, I mean, I'm trying to,
I wanted to sort of start with the premise of why are we so bad
at, you know,
like I tell the story in a book of the Larry Nasser case at Michigan state,
which one's that that's the guy, remember the doctor for the gymnastics team?
Oh yeah. It turns out to have been sexually molest pedophile. Yeah.
Huge pedophile.
So there you have a case where everyone thinks they know this guy,
he's their friend, he's this gifted doctor.
The parents are willingly bringing their kids to, to be treated by him.
The parents are in the room while he is abusing
their kids and they don't see it.
The kids are saying something weird happen and the parents are dismissing it.
So I wanted to,
that's a good example of a phenomenon that I wanted to try and explain,
which is how is that possible?
How can we think we know someone and be so completely, um,
wrong? How can you take your kid to a doctor and think that doc is the greatest
possible doctor. And in fact,
what he's doing is abusing your child in front of you, right?
And that's a very similar kind of problem to Bernie Madoff.
People invested their life savings with this guy. Not,
not little old ladies in Dubuque, sophisticated savvy,
incredibly intelligent investors handed over millions of dollars to this
guy who was not even tr I mean,
the Madoff fraud was so outrageous. He didn't even bother to,
he didn't even put it in T billslls. I mean, he just spent it.
It was just like crazy what's T bills.
Treasury bills.
Oh, I mean, he, he wasn't even, he was, he was a 100%,
uh, sociopath fraud. Yes.
And people over the course of 20 years wrote check after,
check after, check after, check to him thinking was this brilliant investor,
you know, it's like, that's a puzzle. That's what I wanted to get at.
People did recognize that something was wrong. Right? Yeah. There,
there were financial analysts that were saying that this doesn't make sense.
A few of them, but it's funny. There's a, the, my favorite story,
um, on the,
in the Madoff chapter is the greatest hedge fund in the world is Renaissance
technologies.
These are the guys out in long island who have had like 30% returns
for 25 years. They're like all PhD are, you know,
AI genius, literally geniuses.
And they found themselves years before badoff was busted.
They found themselves with, I think,
$30 million in a Madoff fund because of some complicated transaction
and they're all geniuses. So they look at what Madoff's doing. And they're like,
mm, that don't look good. Like that doesn't make any sense to me. And so like,
what should we do?
We have 30 million stake in a fund and we don't understand what the guy's doing.
And you would think logically they would sell their stake.
They don't cause it's returning. No, it, in fact,
it's not even returning that their own legit returns are twice.
His illegitimate returns really they're making,
they actually make the point that his returns are really low for us.
Like there's no reason for us to keep their money <laugh> but they don't sell
what. So that's what I was trying to understand. Like they can't even, you know,
there's this notion I talk book is called default to truth,
which is this idea it's from a, a researcher called Tim Levine,
which is as human beings, we're trusting engines.
We are evolved to give people the benefit of the doubt.
And once you understand that and why do we do that? Because it's the right move.
99% of the time, most people are being truthful.
And if you have as your strategy, <affirmative>,
I'm gonna believe what people say. It makes you a fantastic friend,
a wonderful person to work with. It means that you can, you know,
skate through the world with a minimum of, of fuss. If you're a, the paranoid,
person's a person, whoses life is a nightmare, right?
Because they are suspicious of everything that moves.
So we evolved to be trusting engine because that makes
your life easier. That's the best part of human people. Wanna mate with you?
Like if you wanna talk in evolution in terms about who passes on their genes,
nice people pass on their genes,
given the choice between having a child with a crazy suspicious,
paranoid person or a loving, trusting person, you choose a loving,
trusting person. <affirmative> a hundred percent of the time.
So multi out times, a million years of human history,
you realize trusting genes,
beat paranoid genes every day of the week. Right? So that's what we are.
We're incredulous by, by, by evolutionary choice.
So those guys at, in the, uh, Renaissance months,
they're, they're no different. They may be smarter than the rest of us,
but they're not constructed differently. Their inclination is to believe people.
And they're like, wow, I don't know. Guy says, he's a good investor, man.
Why not? Let's hang onto to it. See what happens. Mm. Right.
Mm-hmm that's their motive. They don't, they don't, you don't get to,
to run a organization as successful as Renaissance' technologies.
If you're some, is he paranoid person, right.
How would you even invest in anything? If you were crazy and paranoid,
there was.
A lot of people that were really intelligent that invested in bernieie Madoff's
hedge fund too. Steven Spielberg was one of '. He lost a, a ton of money.
Oh yeah.
I mean, look at the roster list. There isn't a,
you cannot point to an unsophaviisticated investor on the list of people who
lost them on is money from every one of them is smart. That's so strange.
It's so great. It is crazy. Like, think about it. Like, and by the way,
getting a decent return in the market is super easy. You, you go to, you know,
Vanguard and they, you know, they'll give you the market return.
You're in your, it's not that hard. But these people are like,
they wanted to do something fancier and they, and that's what happened.
Well, he,
when you realize what a sociopath actually was is in the
interviews after he is caught,
or he is demanding certain things and complaining about certain things,
he doesn't seem to have any remorse. Got it. And he wants better treatment.
He wants better food. He doesn't seem to have any remorse that he's, you know,
literally robbed people of their retirement. Yeah. Yeah. Ruined the,
the last part of their lives,
where they thought they were gonna have a considerable sum of money to sit back
and just mm-hmm <affirmative> enjoy their grandchildren. No.
Now they're broke now. Now they're poor. Yeah.
Now they have to figure out a way to get by and eat. He doesn't give a.
He does. He doesn't. In fact, what's weird.
There's so many things weird about the Madoff case. Um,
one of them is we forget that he doesn't get caught. He turns himself in.
Right. And he turns himself in because, uh,
not because he's screwing up, but as he quote unquote, so good.
Cause remember the financial crisis hits in 2008 and his clients are
losing so much money on their legit investments that they go to
madup and say, can I have some of my money back from you?
I gotta pay off all the stuff I've done. That it's gone sour. So like in effect,
no one ever caught him. He gets caught by a once in a,
you know,
one in a million circumstance where he's the only one making any money for his
clients. So they come after him. My point is, if you,
if you're totally rational and you look at this,
you say here's a guy who managed to bamboozle the most sophisticated people in
the world to the tuna, billions of dollars for 25 years.
He only gets caught because we had a once in a lifetime financial meltdown.
Isn't the rational lesson of that, that we should all be Bernie Madoffs. Right.
He's like super easy. It's like, not that hard I could, all I have to do is,
you know, he dressed really nicely.
I get really nice office space on the east SED of Manhattan. What.
What did he, he do, nothing really didn't invest in anything.
He just moved other people's money around and he ran a Ponzi scheme. Well, he.
Spent.
A lot of it. And how did his sons not catch onto this? That's a good question.
Cause they're not being well.
One of them committed suicide ever. Right. That's right. Um, and then,
so it's an open question of how much they, how much anyone else knew. Um,
I, you know, the older I get,
the more I believe in the powers of particularly within,
within family denial is something.
Now I don't find hard to believe. Hmm. So your ability,
I've now heard so many stories of, you know,
a parent is some kind of monster and family members
just won't see it. They just can't bring themselves to go that.
So did they know something?
Everyone knew there was something slightly fishy in what Bernie was doing,
but they never went so far as to think that he was just making it.
Up. So they knew something was up,
but they didn't know it was a hundred percent horses.
They thought that he was so there was some people thought that he actually
had investments, but he was, there was a suspicion for example,
that he was front running that because he had a larger business, um,
uh, uh, sort of managing the,
the deal flow in the NASDAQ that he would get advanced word of where money was
flowing. And he would jump ahead of the queue,
buy stocks before other people did and profit off the,
when the stock would rise, he would just sell and profit off that difference.
So there was a feeling that he had a dubious kind of
illegitimate strategy that nonetheless legitimately made him a lot of money.
So people were like, well, if,
as long as he can get away with it and I could profit off it, I'm fine. Right.
But the truth is he wasn't doing that at all. And truth is, he was just, he was,
he had his, he had some Confederate in the attic of his company,
essentially making up trade orders from scratch. I mean,
they were just making up. Did, did.
How many people got arrested?
I forget. I think they took, I can't remember the exact number.
I think they got, he had two Confederates, I think who went down with him.
That's it? I think it's what it was in retrospect. It's a really,
it's one of these crazy, it's one of these crazy. You think it, you know,
that whole institutions would've fallen. Yes. No.
Did you ever hear the conversation that he had? I,
I believe it was recorded somehow on a phone or something,
or maybe it was after he was in jail where he was talking about trying to get
money back from one of his biggest investors.
The guy had gotten like a billion dollars from him over the years. That's right.
That's right. That's right. Yeah. And he is like,
you gotta give the money back and he's like, you. I'm not giving you. Yeah.
And you know,
then there's this crazy conversation where he is basically telling this guy,
look, you knew this was.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> and you were making money off this and now, you know? Yeah.
Yeah.
Its so you, so this is like the clever, so if you think about this, that guy,
I know you exactly what you're talking about. Yeah. So,
so game the stew let's let's let's do a, let's do a, um, a uh,
a hypothetical scenario. Okay.
You have a friend who's an incredible salesman and has gone around Europe,
into Saudi Arabia and whatever, and raised a $20 million fund 20 billion fund.
And they're promising a 20% return a year on your investment, right?
So you give 'em a million, you're getting $200,000 a year back from this thing,
you know, it's all, but no one else does.
What is the rational thing for you to do?
The rational thing for you to do is to take your on your million dollar
investment take the $200,000 that is made,
made in quotation marks every year out of the fund. So you say most people,
you know, when you invest in stocks, not only what you do is you check the box.
I want my, I want any dividends or earnings reinvested in the fund.
Don't check the box, take the real cash.
So if you're investing with this phony friend of yours for 20 years,
you're gonna get $200,000 a year for 20 years. That's 4 million.
You will make 4 million clear of your out of your
1 million initial investment, uh,
in 20 years. Right. That's smart if you know what's going on.
So that's what some people did with Madoff. They're like, yeah,
I don't know what he's doing. These returns are pretty fantastic.
I'm just gonna take all my earnings off the table every single year.
So they are the ones who,
the real winners of this whole thing with those people. Yeah.
Cause this money's not real that money's coming from other investors there's,
nothing's being made.
Actually what happens with them?
Like if a guy does make all these millions of dollars, like that one guy he.
Had to, so he had to give some of it back. Yeah.
So what happens is they appoint, remember they appoint a, um,
after the scandal breaks and made up his invest, they bring in a,
a kind of supervisor,
financial supervisor who has the power to claw back winnings from
money from the people who took, who took cash off the table. So,
but not everyone had to claw back. And the question was, how far back do we go?
So if you were investing,
if you were investing with 25 years ago and you took, you know,
10 million off the table between 1990 and 1993,
do you have to give that up too? Like it gets complicated also.
How can you prove that he was doing the same activity back then? Exactly.
Exactly.
Oh.
It's gone the conversation. I,
I really wish I could remember where I was hearing this conversation,
but somebody had, had recorded Madoff talking to this guy, telling him, look,
you gotta give that money back. Yeah, yeah.
Yeah. My Schwab fund looks better and better all the time. <laugh>.
It's just so scary to me that,
I mean finances and the stock market and all that stuff has always looked like
magic. Like what is going on there? What are they doing?
They're moving these numbers around.
Like when you see the tick or tape it roll by like what, what is all that?
If you don't have any understanding of it, it's like a foreign language. Yeah.
And so you're hoping that all these geniuses can't be duped.
All these people throwing their tickets up in the air and everybody that's like,
go buy, sell. They all know what's going on. You don't know what's going on,
but Hey, there's a lot of things that you know, that they don't know.
And this is just how the world works. Yeah.
Turns out no turns out the people that were involved in this crazy.
Very difficult to understand thing. Didn't know it either. Yeah.
Like they barely can understand it.
And this guy was just stealing money in some weird way.
And if the stock market didn't crash,
if we didn't have some sort of a depression who knows how he might still be
in today.
He would. So without, without the crash in 2008, there's a very,
very strong possibility that Bernie Madoff would still be going gangbusters.
All he has to do to keep surviving is to take in enough money
to cover withdrawals. Yes. So there's some, like we say,
there's some portion of people who are withdrawing their winnings.
He just needs to make enough to get new enough new money to cover the
withdrawals.
So he's got a 50 billion hedge fund and let's imagine there's a
billion in withdrawals coming out every year. He's gotta raise a billion. Now,
if you're burning and you already have 50, it's not that hard.
You raise another.
And particularly because he had people all around the world and he was giving
them these huge fees to raise money for him. So the that's the other way,
the rip,
the people who really made money from him were the people who had,
I forgotten what it was.
But you would be say your you're Joe,
the financial guy in Zurich, you have a whole bunch of wealthy European clients.
Bernie would let for every, for every million you raise for Bernie,
Bernie would let you keep I forgotten what it was a hundred grand.
That's a nice base. That's real money. Yeah.
So you just kick back 900 to Bernie and keep a hundred grand and that you're
free and clear. No, one's claw that back. Right? Right.
That's those guys got very, very, very well, very, very wealthy. Ooh, that's.
Weird money. You're sitting in your house that stealing built.
God, that's gotta be strange.
So what can be learned in terms of communication from the Bernie Madoff story?
Well, the,
the Bernie Madoff story and the all, you know, all of these ways,
but this one in particular goes to this question of,
we really think we're good at spotting liars and we're not.
So virtually every profession that is invested in, you know, in,
in, in investigation of human beings has belief that, you know,
we know how to figure out his likes. Yes. And the truth is nobody does.
And if someone tells you, they are good at spotting liars,
there's a 99% chance that they're lying. <laugh> so the,
the evidence that the,
so you could think if we did an experiment here where I had a hundred people
prayed through this office right now, the studio right now,
and every one of them made a statement in front of you and some would lying and
some would tell the truth. And I asked you, Joe, tell me who's lying.
And who's not your accuracy rate. Your success rate would be,
uh, 52 to 54%. In other words, slightly better than chance.
You might as well flip a coin, um, slightly.
But if you don't and that's not about you,
anyone in that chair watching these people parade in front of us is
gonna do a slightly bit better than chance.
And the reason we're slightly better than chance is there are a small fraction
of people who are such epically bad liars, that there's just,
we're not gonna lose those people. Like we, those are, are.